>> This is "Nuevo."
An investigation that shows that
the FBI memorandum reporting
the crash landing of
three ships in New Mexico
before 1950 as a result of the
operation of high power radars
was real.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Gaia presents "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussán.
>> Scott and Suzanne Ramsey have
been investigating the Aztec
case for dozens of years and
were even able to find some
of the secret radar bases
that operated there.
The "Nuevo" cameras were
only the second ones
to have visited this site.
>> How many people were here?
>> About 100.
They worked three shifts.
I think it grew to about 200
by the mid 50s and through 1957
when they are announcing that
they were closing it and going
with the DEW line radar system.
>> Why did they install these
radar right after the war?
>> These were here
for one main purpose.
And that was to protect Los
Alamos, Sandia National Labs,
and Kirkland Air Force Base.
And if you look at where they
are on a map, which we'll
do later, El Vado was north, is
far north, Moriarty was east,
and Continental Divide was west.
>> They were afraid of what?
>> Well, we were at the
beginning-- well, actually,
well into the Cold War.
So we were protecting
these bases
against espionage, spy planes,
or bomber raids by the Soviets.
>> And these radars
were experimental,
very powerful by the way?
>> Yes, these were brand new.
They weren't the military
surplus that some people claim.
I've done extensive
research on this.
They had brand new height
finder, range finder, locator.
And then they had,
where we were standing
before, that was the
experimental lash-up that
was up here for the Navy.
>> Very powerful.
>> Very, very powerful, yeah.
That was to be used
and experimented
for the Navy where
they could look over
the horizon for metallic,
anything metallic,
a ship, whatever.
>> Was UFO the purpose
of these radars too?
>> No, no, I think
that was a secondary--
this, right here
where we are now--
I could show you on maps--
was all restricted airspace.
Because Los Alamos is
just straight down there.
They did in their quarterly
journals report UFOs
that they had picked
up on the radar, which
I found interesting.
But those reports did not go
to Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base.
Those reports went right
up here to Colorado
to the Ent Air Force Base
near Colorado Springs.
Actually, it's at the other
end of Colorado Springs.
They had a group up there,
AISS, Air Intelligence Service
Squadron.
And they went under
then the call letters
of the 4602 small "d"
was their group number.
That was a very secretive
investigative group
for the United States Air Force.
They're still in
existence today,
but they don't go under 4602.
They were discovered by a
researcher, Donald Keyhoe,
retired from the United
States Marine Corps
at one point where he
mentioned their existence.
So then they changed
their designation
to the 1006th, 1006.
And I have no idea
what it is today,
not much published about them.
But that's where the UFO
reports from this base
would go, directly up to AISS.
>> You said the main purpose
was to track UFOs from here.
But at the same time,
could these radars
have affected the UFOs?
Could these be the
reason of the crashes
we have in New Mexico from
1945 to 1948 or probably later.
>> I've never been
able to prove that.
The original radar base
was down at El Vado Lake.
This one it was under-- probably
well under construction in 1948
when Aztec happened.
Because I noticed when
they moved up here
they are already
calling for repairs.
And this probably took a
couple of years to build.
You're only seeing
just a fraction
of how large this base is.
I have never been able to
tie-- because the original one
that we know is in
operation from '46 on,
I don't think they had
a powerful enough radar
to knock it out.
But we can't tell.
We can't prove it.
You know, we came looking for--
>> It's possible.
>> I guess anything is possible.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> These radar bases were such
a secret that there are very few
historical references
about their operation.
Thanks to years of searching,
Scott and Suzanne Ramsey
found evidence that
they were real.
>> Finally, you proved that
these secret that radar bases
existed?
>> Yeah.
>> Because many people
had mentioned them,
but nobody had found them.
>> Yeah, that's true.
And we photographed and mapped
this place the best we could
that day.
It was very, very snowy up here.
I went down to Maxwell
Air Force Base.
They had trouble locating
it because there was a--
there had been a transition.
The original bases
were built and run
by the Atomic Energy
Commission then taken over
by the Air Force.
And the three bases
I don't think we're
intentionally packed
away in some archive,
but because there had been
a transition between Atomic
Energy Commission and the Air
Force, they had been misplaced.
But once we showed the Air
Force, here's the pictures,
here's the map,
here's a rough sketch
where all the buildings are.
We have the powerhouse, the
radar building, the steam room,
the machine shop, the
barracks, and all the buildings
that go down forever and ever.
They were very helpful in
locating it and saying,
oh, here it is.
>> Without any doubt.
>> Without any doubt, yeah.
They gave us the
historical records and maps
and the whole bit, sure.
>> How powerful
it was this radar?
>> Well, it was powerful enough
that even though this was
a restricted airspace for
private aircraft or commercial,
for that matter, there
were manuals written on how
to quickly shut the radar down
if a private aircraft wandered
into this airspace.
>> What could happen
to that airplane?
>> Probably knock out the
electrical system and possibly
harm the people on the plane.
>> And that's exactly what
happened to these UFOs,
at least what most people
believe it happened?
>> Could be, could be.
It's a good theory, but
it's a tough one to prove.
>> And also, we have the
memorandum from the FBI where
they mention the possibility
that these secret radars were--
>> Mhm, had knocked it out.
>> --possible to
knock these UFOs down.
>> Right, yep, that document
was released back in, what,
the 70s.
And they talk about three
powerful radar bases.
We found three.
>> Well, this is an
amazing discovery.
You proved what
nobody else could.
We are very thankful.
Because this is just the
second time that a camera has--
>> --has ever been
here, yeah, that's true.
>> Scott Ramsey's investigation
confirms that photographs
of the saucer and alien beings
in the Aztec incident were
taken from the men
that saw the event.
And even though the cameras
and the rolls of film
were confiscated, it is
possible they still exist
and might one day be released.
Scott Ramsey revealed
other details.
>> When was the next
time you went back?
After you left and
the saucer was there,
when was the next
time you went back--
>> Never did go back in there.
They used to have the guard up.
You're not going to
get back in there.
>> So on this day,
you haven't been back?
>> No.
What's the use?
I saw it when it was there.
They wouldn't let us
take any pictures.
And the cameras that we had
that did have pictures in them,
they just confiscated all those.
>> There are documents that
indicate that the FBI, the CIA,
and the Army were involved in
an investigation concerning
photographs of the Aztec
UFO and its beings.
>> The most interesting ones I
find are the fact that the FBI,
the Air Force OSI, and possibly
the CIA had set up a sting
operation in downtown Denver to
recover pictures of the Aztec
crash--
their words, not ours--
and that a reporter from
the Baltimore Sun Times
had come out and was
trying to purchase them
for the purpose of publishing
them in the Baltimore Sun
Times.
That said, I'll let
you read the documents.
And we can pick up what
the documents mean.
Those documents, to me,
are much more interesting
because we have three
divisions of our government
trying to set up a
sting operation at a bar
and restaurant in
downtown Denver
and getting the
parties involved that
were trying to purchase the
pictures, the person involved
in selling the pictures.
And the fact that the Air Force
and the FBI in their words
say, at the end, the person
selling and buying both
claimed that it was a hoax,
but we don't believe them.
The FBI and Air Force believed
that there were pictures.
>> In the declassified document
of the United States Air Force
from September 30, 1950 it is
established that an individual,
identified as Klein from
the Baltimore Sun newspaper,
wanted to pay $1,500 for
photographs of the Aztec alien
ship from Agent McGuffin.
McGuffin assured him that
he had a roll of film
with photographs that
he had taken of the ship
and that he had hidden
them from the Army.
He assured McGuffin that
he had been at the site
where the ship had gone down.
On October 2, 1950, Klein was
questioned at the Army offices
in Denver, where
he denied having
any knowledge of the Aztec UFO.
Army personnel felt
that the man had
specific knowledge about
the Aztec incident,
but wouldn't admit it.
According to a
personality analysis,
Klein did not give
the impression
of being mentally unstable or
was one to attract attention.
Although he did admit that he
had drank alcohol at the time
he offered to buy
the photographs.
Klein claimed to be a reporter
for the Baltimore Sun.
The report is signed by Wallace
B. Scholes, district commander.
>> In a way, they are
recognizing that this really
happened and that's why--
>> Oh yeah, they're not denying
that the Aztec UFO incident
happened at all.
As a matter of fact,
they're reacting, saying,
"My god, if there's pictures
of it floating around,
we need to get the
pictures back."
We know from several
good witnesses
that black and white photos
were taken of the crash.
Frank Scully tells
it in his book.
And Frank Scully's
wife confirms it.
She held pictures of
the UFO crash landing,
whatever we want to call
it, that happened out
on Hart Canyon Road.
She held them in her hand.
Another researcher, who is now
deceased, backs that story up.
>> In another recently
declassified document from
October 16, 1950, the Army
closed the investigation
of the Aztec UFO photographs,
finding no evidence.
However, the
photographs, according
to the testimony of a few
people, claimed they did exist.
The Aztec case came under
public scrutiny thanks
to Frank Scully, an
investigative journalist,
who published the book, "Behind
the Flying Saucer" in September
1950, an overnight success that
sold more than 50,000 copies
in a few weeks.
The public was fascinated
with the story.
However, a smear campaign
would be carried out
after finding two of the
key players in the story
admitted they lied.
Silas Newton and Leo
Ge Bauer were legally
charged with committing fraud,
fraud that was never proven.
Unfortunately, it was too late
and the public lost interest
in the alien claims just as
had happened before in the case
of the Roswell crashes.
Today we know that both
cases are authentic.
Frank Fair, a journalism scholar
at New Mexico State University,
confirms this.
>> Frank Scully
was a journalist.
He was an entertainment
journalist.
And he wrote in a very
breezy, entertaining style.
But underneath, I began
to see that everything
in his book that seemed so
bizarre had a factual base.
And the more I
learned about him,
the more I felt that
we had something--
he had almost like a
puzzle in his book.
And you began to--
and I can turn to
any page in his book
and find something that
looks strange when we first
looked at it, turned out he
was telling the absolute truth
and he knew.
He had talked to
these scientists.
Silas Newton had introduced
him to scientists
who had probably pieces of
the craft, I don't know.
And Scully, to his dying day,
Scully said that this was true,
he never backed down from it.
And now Scott Ramsey has
proved him to be a prophet,
theoretically, you know?
In 1950, this book, Scully's
book sold 50,000 copies.
That should have ended the
secrecy about flying saucers.
But it was just beginning.
Somebody-- we don't know who--
some government agency
began to do a hatchet job
on Frank Scully and his
sources until he was
branded a hokester or a dupe.
Either he had hoaxed
the story or he
had been conned by Silas Newton
and his friend, Leo Ge Bauer.
And they said, there
were no such thing
as these nine scientists.
And now you read chapter
four of Scott Ramsey's book.
And you can see
all the scientists.
They all worked under Vannevar
Bush in the War Department.
They all were working
on magnetic anomalies.
And they all knew Silas Newton--
or most of them did.
And they talked to Frank Scully.
And they believed the
story should come out.
They believe the people
should get the story.
And then they realized that the
secrecy oaths they had taken
were very serious
and the penalties
very severe for revealing it.
So as Scully said, in 1949,
they would tell their stories
for free.
By 1950, they wouldn't tell
their stories for $20 million.
Scully was telling the truth.
>> We believe that Scully
was telling the truth,
a truth that is again
resurfacing more than 60 years
later.
The United States government
had undertaken a campaign
to discourage the authenticity
of Scully's story.
They wanted the case to
be literally forgotten.
>> We want to confirm that
this incident really happened,
that that 100-foot disk landed
on Hart Canyon Mesa and that
the military opened it up
and took away these bodies.
We can prove this happened.
We have the witnesses.
In a courtroom case, if you
have two witnesses who do not
know each other and they
tell the same story,
the jury is going
to have to say,
"They are telling the truth."
And I will say, certainly, Scott
Ramsey wants to tell the truth.
I've never seen him want
to change anything or make
it better or fill in something
with a fictional edition.
Everything in the book
is documented fact
as best he can do it.
>> Frank Scully was told
this story by scientists that
allegedly worked on the craft
after it was recovered out here
on Hart Canyon Road.
Throughout his book,
"Behind the Flying Saucers,"
that came out September
1950, he completely
goes through the whole scenario
with the scientists, what they
saw, what they experienced.
And he leaves you little
hints throughout the book book
on who these scientists were.
I've read that book 20 times.
And each time I
would reread it--
I have a copy that I've
marked all up with a Sharpie
highlighter.
And I go back and he'd be
talking about a scientist.
And I'd highlight certain
things he said about them.
And Suzanne and I spent hundreds
of hours looking at the eight
to nine scientists that
Scully claimed made up
the composite of Dr. Gee.
We've compared them
to all the scientists
that worked on the
Manhattan Project
or OSRD during World War II
where these guys allegedly
came from, peeling back layers
and layers of the onion,
comparing resumes, schooling,
what colleges, what
universities, what
degrees they had,
how many PhDs were
within the group.
And it took us years
until we came up
with what we figured
is a near-perfect list
of the scientists that we felt
talked to Frank Scully back
in 1949 for his book in 1950.
>> Who's Dr. Ge?
>> Dr. Gee, in our opinion,
the main Dr. Gee was Dr.
Jonathan Torrence Tate, who
was a fantastic physicist,
had gone to school at University
of Berlin in Germany prior
to the war breaking out,
finished his college
at Nebraska, went on
to get his doctorate.
We go into great detail
about him in our book.
And then the
peripheral scientist
that he actually would have
worked with during World War II
and after, he headed up
Division 6 of the OSRD.
The head of OSRD
was a name that's
very familiar to people
who studied UFOs and flying
saucers, Dr. Vannevar Bush.
That was the boss.
All of a sudden, pieces of
the puzzle started to fit.
Then we started looking at
schedules, travel schedules.
Where were these people in '49?
Where were they in '48?
Where were they traveling?
Frank Scully goes into detail
where he met some of them
in his travels.
If he doesn't go into
those details in his book,
he goes into those details
in his private letters
and memoirs, which
we've spent hundreds
of hours poring through.
It's just an amazing
puzzle that Scully left.
He left a paper trail
when it comes to Dr. Gee
that we were able
to put together.
>> I know that Frank Scully--
and I now believe
what he said-- he
said that there were eight
scientists in one place,
he said.
They all knew Silas Newton.
They knew him because Silas
Newton wanted to find oil.
And he wanted to use magnetic
anomaly detection devices
to find oil, which he did.
And these people had
created these devices
for finding submarines
during World War II.
And they did.
They sank submarines
because they
were able to find
them with something
beyond sonar and beyond radar.
And so I think that he knew,
and it was his opinion,
that the public should
find out about it.
The war was over.
We didn't need secrecy anymore.
And these scientists
met with Frank Scully.
Yet, he was smart enough
never to reveal their names.
He called them
collectively Dr. Gee.
And the main Dr. Gee,
as Scott has found out
through, oh, laborious research,
he's found out that Dr. Gee,
the main Dr. Gee was probably
Dr. Tate who died in 1950.
>> John Torrence Tate?
>> John Torrence Tate.
The place was packed.
And he said, "There is such
a thing as a flying saucer."
And he went on for
50 some odd minutes.
And then they rushed him
out of the auditorium.
And the Air Force
was hot on his heels.
They were trying to find him.
They didn't know where he was.
And the radio man
John Keeler Kohler
hid him and got him out of--
and it was a long time
before they figured out.
But Scully finally said
it was Silas Newton who
gave the lecture.
But from then on, Silas
Newton was a marked man.
And by 1952, they were starting
to build a case against him,
trying to find something
to prosecute him on,
not because they wanted
to prosecute him,
but because they wanted to
destroy the Aztec story.
And it worked.
It worked for another 50 years.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> After giving the conference
at the University of Colorado
in Denver, both Silas
Newton, Leo Ge Bauer,
and Frank Scully were
persecuted and discredited.
The case was considered a fraud.
It took more than 60 years
for new investigators
to take up the case
and discover that truth
behind what is hidden in Aztec.
It is without a doubt
an authentic case
which has now being reconfirmed
by Guy Hottel's memorandum.
In that area, near the
Aztec in Farmington,
there were waves
of UFO sightings
shortly after the
Aztec case, showing
that something very strange was
happening there in such a way
that this story is
still very much alive.
>> In March of 1950, according
to the Farmington Daily Times,
an extraordinary event occurred
when dozens of unidentified
flying objects flew in
formation over Farmington,
a neighboring town of Aztec,
an amazing event that made
the front page of the
Farmington Daily Times.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> What happened here in the
morning of March 17, 1950,
Scott?
>> Well, from the
Northwest direction,
hundreds of UFO came
over Farmington,
flying right over downtown here
and going in that direction
and then banking off to the
left heading toward the east.
This sighting lasted
for about 41 minutes.
The story came to
the Daily Times.
And it made the headlines
the next day in the paper.
>> According to them, there
were hundreds of witnesses.
>> Yeah, there were hundreds.
As a matter of fact, teachers
would bring the children out
from the school and onto
the playground to witness
the spectacular flyover.
>> What did people say then?
>> They were all silvery desks
except for one lead flying
saucer.
This seemed to lead the pack.
It was bright red
as though it was
glowing bright red from heat.
>> Why you think this happened?
>> I don't know.
There's been some that
speculate that maybe this
was close to two years to the
date of the Aztec incident
and maybe they were coming over
and show their comrades support
or maybe it was just
another sighting altogether.
But it's one that, even
for UFO researchers that
don't look at Aztec
with a lot of light,
still find this one fascinating
and very well-documented.
>> Shortly before finishing
this investigation,
our crew witnessed
a strange sighting.
Shortly before 6 o'clock
in the afternoon,
they observed a very
bright object in the sky
over Farmington near
Aztec, New Mexico.
The UFO was extremely bright.
Unfortunately, they didn't
have a camera with them
and were concerned it
wouldn't be documented.
However, upon returning
to New Mexico,
they were able to obtain
this video from a witness who
recorded the object in Aztec
at exactly the same time
and day of the crew's
sighting, confirming
the presence of a bright
triangular object in the sky.
What do you think?
[THEME MUSIC]
>> All the events presented in
this investigation are subject
to debate.
And several researchers
do not consider them real.
However, as it's
been demonstrated
throughout this investigation,
the evidence, the witnesses,
and the investigation of those
who have been directly involved
such as Paola Harris, in
the case of San Antonio, New
Mexico, Donald Schmitt and Tom
Carey in the case of Roswell,
and Scott and Suzanne
Ramsey in the case of Aztec
show that these events are real,
and that they happened exactly
as they are referred to in
Guy Hottel memo to Hoover.
Even though the FBI
continues to deny it,
today we know that
everything was true
and that the events happened.
I am Jaime Maussán.
And I'll see you on the
next edition of "Nuevo."
>> Gaia presented "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussán.